

RELIANCE EDGE RELEASE NOTES


This file contains a list of updates made to Reliance Edge over the
course of recent releases and a list of known issues.


Release History and Changes

Reliance Edge v2.5.1a, May 2021

Common Code Changes

-   Fixed an endian-swapping bug that prevented little-endian host tools
    from operating an a volume from a big-endian target, and vice versa.
-   Fix a bug where, after deleting all the files in a directory, the
    directory could still have a nonzero size, preventing it from being
    deleted. This bug could only manifest when the directory entry size
    was _not_ an integral divisor of the block size. In other words,
    when the following was true:
    REDCONF_BLOCK_SIZE % (REDCONF_NAME_MAX + 4) != 0

INTEGRITY Port Changes

Fixed several bugs affecting the client-server configuration
(libredfs.a):

-   A client was unable to mount a volume that was already mounted by
    another client.
-   If a client unmounted a volume with the MNT_FORCE flag, it would
    fail to close its open handles if another client had the volume
    mounted, which could lead to spurious EMFILE or EBUSY errors later
    on. Note that this bug could not manifest, due to the prior bug
    preventing multiple client mounts.
-   When the Reliance Edge checker (fsck_redfs) was invoked, the client
    library was sending the wrong opcode to the server, causing the
    volume to be reformatted rather than checked.
-   Fix a bug where readdir() could skip entries in large directories.

Fixed one bug affecting the unified configuration (libredfs_unified.a):

-   Fix a potential buffer overrun in the readdir() implementation.

Reliance Edge v2.5.1, May 2020

Common Code Changes

-   Rebrand from Datalight to Tuxera. For details, please read the
    following:
    https://www.tuxera.com/blog/tuxera-and-datalight-continue-forward-as-one-unified-brand-tuxera/
-   Fix a v2.5 regression where the checker (available in the
    commercially-licensed SDK) did not work when run as a standalone
    application.

Linux Port Changes

-   Fix a v2.5 regression where the RAM disk was erroneously allocated
    as a zero-sized buffer.

Win32 Port Changes

-   Fix a v2.5 regression where the powerint and errinject test projects
    (provided with the commercially-licensed SDK) were not functional.

Reliance Edge v2.5, April 2020

Common Code Changes

-   By popular demand, implement support for automatically detecting the
    sector count and sector size at run-time, as an alternative to
    specifying those values at compile-time.
    -   This change is backward compatible with old redconf.c/redconf.h
        configuration files, which will continue to work as before. The
        configuration files only need to be updated if enabling this new
        feature is desired. To enable the feature, download the v2.5
        version of the Reliance Edge Configuration Utility and select
        the "Auto" checkbox for the sector count or sector size.
    -   Related to this change, a new file has been added to Reliance
        Edge: bdev/bdev.c. If you have your own build system or project
        which lists all the Reliance Edge source files, please update it
        to include this new file.
    -   The block device OS service (osbdev.c) has a new API to query
        the sector count and sector size: RedOsBDevGetGeometry(). If you
        implemented your own version of osbdev.c for a previous version
        of Reliance Edge, to update to v2.5 you must add an implemention
        of this new API. See os/stub/services/osbdev.c for a template.
        If you do not need the new feature, the API can be stubbed to
        return -RED_ENOTSUPP.
-   Implement a block allocation optimization that improves write
    performance in some circumstances.
-   Add red_umount2() to the POSIX-like API. It is similar to
    red_umount() except that unmount flags can be specified. A flag is
    provided to force an unmount even if there are open handles.

FreeRTOS Port Changes

-   Remove the F_DRIVER example implementation of the block device
    service, which was deemed obsolete because support for FAT SL was
    removed in FreeRTOS v10.

INTEGRITY Port Changes

-   Implement support for the MNT_RDONLY and MNT_NOTRIM flags, used with
    the mount() system call.
-   Implement support for the MNT_FORCE flag in the unmount() system
    call, which has the effect of forcing an unmount even if there are
    open handles.
-   Calling mount() when Reliance Edge is already mounted now fails and
    sets errno to EBUSY; whereas previously it did nothing and returned
    success. The new behavior is consistent with the behavior of the
    native file systems.
-   If mount() or unmount() is passed a mount point with extraneous
    trailing path separators, they now fail and set errno to EINVAL.
    This fixes a bug where using trailing path separators would seem to
    succeed, but the VFS would fail to update the mount point array
    correctly, which could cause problems for subsequent operations.

FUSE Port Changes

-   Fix build errors in non-default configurations.

Reliance Edge v2.4, November 2019

Common Code Changes

-   Fixed a bug which caused the maximum inode size to be miscalculated
    in some configurations with larger block sizes (8 KB and up).
-   Add support for a sector size and block size of 128 bytes (the
    previous minimum was 256 bytes). This is primarily useful when
    small-capacity nonvolatile RAM is used as the storage device.
-   red_sync() and red_close() have been fixed to work with read-only
    volumes.
-   Add red_mount2() to the POSIX-like API. It is similar to red_mount()
    except that mount flags can be specified. Flags are provided for
    mounting read-only and (in the commercial kit) to control whether
    discards are issued.
-   Add red_fstrim() to the POSIX-like API (commercial kit only). The
    API is used to discard free space, similar to the fstrim utility on
    Linux systems.
-   The REDCONF_API_POSIX_FSTRIM macro has been added to redconf.h to
    specify whether red_fstrim() should be included. Existing redconf.h
    files must be updated by opening and saving them with the updated
    Configuration Utility.
-   RedOsBDevDiscard() (which only exists in the commercial kit) has
    been updated to return a REDSTATUS value, instead of returning void.
-   MVStressTest, a new stress test that can exercise multiple file
    system volumes, has been added to the commercial kit.

Reliance Edge v2.3, January 2019

Common Code Changes

-   Add support for red_sync() to the POSIX-like API, including the new
    RED_TRANSACT_SYNC automatic transaction flag and requisite
    configuration option in the Reliance Edge Configuration Utility.
-   Add discard testing to BDevTest (available in the commercial kit).
-   Fix bugs affecting multivolume use cases caused by incorrect use of
    "current volume" global variables. These bugs could cause spurious
    I/O errors and metadata corruption.
-   Fix a bug in checker (available in the commercial kit): an array
    indexing error would cause the wrong link count to be printed when
    link count corruption was detected.

INTEGRITY Port Changes

-   Add support for the storage driver API introduced in INTEGRITY
    v11.7.
-   Add INTEGRITY v11.7.x-compatible example projects for the INTEGRITY
    ARM Simulator and the Renesas R-Car H3 Starter Kit.
-   Instead of unconditionally transacting all volumes, the INTEGRITY
    sync() system call now calls red_sync(). Transactions will only be
    performed on volumes which set the RED_TRANSACT_SYNC automatic
    transaction flag.
-   Fixed a bug which resulted in errors when mounting more than one
    volume.
-   An EINVAL error is now returned by mount() if the Reliance Edge
    mount point does not start with "//". Because of how INTEGRITY
    parses paths, the "//" has always been required; and while this was
    documented, it was not enforced in the code, which could lead to
    subtle errors.

Reliance Edge v2.2.1, June 2018

Common Code Changes

-   Fix bugs in the implementation of the sector offset feature added in
    Reliance Edge v2.2. Anyone who set the sector offset to a value
    other than zero is strongly encouraged to upgrade.
-   Fix a minor bug in the POSIX-like API where operations which are not
    allowed on the root directory -- such as deleting, renaming, or
    recreating it -- would set red_errno to RED_EINVAL rather than the
    appropriate errno value.
-   Fix a bug in the POSIX-like API Test Suite which caused a link error
    if relative paths were enabled but rename was disabled.
-   Fix minor documentation issues.
-   Fix a test bug which was causing the simulated power interruption
    test in projects/powerint to fail. This test is only provided with
    the commercial kit.

INTEGRITY Port Changes

-   Fix a bug in the block device code which would fail to report an
    error and leave the sector size uninitialized, later causing a
    memory violation.
-   Update to support binary and text modes with fopen(), such as "w+b"
    or "rt". Regardless of open mode, Reliance Edge, like the native
    file systems, does not perform newline conversions.
-   Minor fixes and enhancements to the INTEGRITY port documentation.
-   Fix a path problem in the host/Makefile for the bbb-app-unified and
    bbb-app-clientserv example projects.

FreeRTOS Port Changes

-   Fix a bug in the F_DRIVER example implementation of the block device
    service. According to the FreeRTOS documentation, the release
    function pointer in the F_DRIVER structure is allowed to be NULL,
    but the old code was calling that function unconditionally, without
    first ensuring it was non-NULL. The updated code will only call
    release when it is non-NULL.

Linux Port Changes

-   Add support for discards on compatible block devices (commercial kit
    only).
-   Add locking to the FUSE port to fix multithreading issues.

Reliance Edge v2.2, December 2017

Common Code Changes

-   The Reliance Edge Configuration Utility has been updated to support
    specifying a sector offset for each volume. This allows Reliance
    Edge to be used on partitioned storage devices without osbdev.c
    customization. To upgrade an old redconf.c to be compatible with
    this change, the sector offset must be manually added to the entry
    for each volume in redconf.c, for example:
    -   Before: { 512U, 65536U, false, 1024U, 0U, "VOL0:" }
    -   After: { 512U, 65536U, 0U, false, 1024U, 0U, "VOL0:" }

INTEGRITY Port Changes

-   Reliance Edge can now be used from more than one AddressSpace, via
    the new client-server implementation. For cases where only one
    AddressSpace is using Reliance Edge and the client-server overhead
    is undesirable, a unified library is also offered; it runs in the
    same AddressSpace as the application, similar to the v2.1 release.
-   The block device implementation has been updated to support
    IDE/ATA/SATA devices.

U-Boot Port Changes

-   Added support for the Universal Boot Loader (U-Boot) in the
    open-source kit. This allows a system using U-Boot to boot from an
    operating system image or kernel image stored on a Reliance Edge
    file system volume.
-   See the "U-Boot Integration" chapter of the _Developer's Guide_ for
    further details on U-Boot support.

Reliance Edge v2.1, October 2017

Common Code Changes

-   Added optional support for current working directories, relative
    paths, and dot and dot-dot handling. This includes the new
    red_chdir() and red_getcwd() APIs.
-   A volume path prefix, by itself, is now a valid reference to the
    root directory on that volume. Assuming the path prefix is "VOL0:"
    and the path separator character is '/', previously
    red_opendir("VOL0:/") would succeed and red_opendir("VOL0:") would
    fail. Now both will succeed. This results in more intuitive behavior
    when the volume path prefix is changed to look like a directory,
    such as "/sdcard"; red_opendir("/sdcard") and red_chdir("/sdcard")
    intuitively look like they should work, and now they do.
-   Updated the imgcopy utility to open files in binary mode. When used
    on Windows, this fixes a problem where Windows attempted to perform
    newline conversion in binary files, corrupting the file data.
-   Fixed a bug in the POSIX-like API Test Suite which caused it to fail
    when run on a volume other than volume zero. Fixed another bug which
    caused it to fail when the volume name was unusually long.
-   Added an option to FSIOTest to control flush frequency for the
    sequential write and sequential rewrite tests. Default behavior is
    unchanged.

INTEGRITY Port Changes

-   Added support for the INTEGRITY RTOS in the commercial kit. Reliance
    Edge integrates into the INTEGRITY file system layer so that system
    calls like open() or read() work with Reliance Edge; there is no
    need to update an application to use Reliance Edge's POSIX-like API.
-   Example projects for the BeagleBone Black are provided.
-   For the time being, the osbdev.c implementation is only known to
    work with the SD card driver supplied with the BeagleBone Black BSP.
    It is known _not_ to work with the IDE driver used on x86 PCs. Other
    storage drivers have not been tested.
-   See the "INTEGRITY Integration" chapter of the _Developer's Guide_
    for further details on INTEGRITY support. Please read this chapter
    before using Reliance Edge on INTEGRITY.

FreeRTOS Port Changes

-   Moved the several example implementations in osbdev.c into header
    files.
-   Added a "stub" example, which is now the default implementation for
    FreeRTOS, and which deliberately does not compile. This is to make
    it obvious that FreeRTOS users need to make modifications to
    osbdev.c for their environment.
-   Added support for using Datalight FlashFX Tera as a block device.
    This support only exists in the commercial kit.
-   The Atmel Studio projects for the SAM4E-EK and SAM4S Xplained Pro
    boards are no longer included in the open source kit; they are still
    available in the commercial kit.

Reliance Edge v2.0, January 2017

-   Added support for Linux as a host environment
    -   All "host" projects may now be built in either Windows or Linux
        using the make command. The formatter and image builder are
        built, and the checker and image copier are also built in the
        commercial kit.
    -   An additional host tool has been added for Linux only: redfuse.
        It is a File System in User Space (FUSE) implementation,
        allowing a Reliance Edge volume to be mounted directly on Linux
        for easy access. It is built from the host project folder using
        the command make redfuse.
    -   The OS-specific API test (commercial kit only) is now ported to
        run on Linux for the purpose of verifying the FUSE
        implementation.
-   Fixed a bug that could leave a directory in an invalid state after
    removing files. For example, an affected directory might report a
    non-zero length even after all files had been deleted.
-   Fixed a bug that would leave the driver in a bad state if a mount
    operation failed due to missing or corrupt metaroot blocks.

Reliance Edge v1.1 (Beta), November 2016

-   Added support for a discard (trim) interface in the commercial kit.
    While discards are not integral to the behavior of the filesystem,
    they allow certain types of Flash drivers and media to perform at
    optimal speed and efficiency. The commercial version of Reliance
    Edge now allows the user to implement this interface for compatible
    storage media.
    -   This change added new fields to the configuration files
        redconf.h and redconf.c. The configuration utility has been
        updated to version 1.1 and existing configuration files must be
        updated using the updated utility.
-   The configuration utility now has keyboard shortcuts for opening and
    saving the configuration.
-   The configuration utility now adds version macros to easily identify
    when an outdated configuration file is used with Reliance Edge or
    vice versa.

Reliance Edge v1.0.4, July 2016

-   Added ARM mbed and ARM mbed OS support in the commercial kit, with
    an example projects for ARM mbed OS on the NXP FRDM-K64F board.
-   Some minor deficiencies in the POSIX-like API test suite have been
    addressed.

Reliance Edge v1.0.3, June 2016

-   Added support for static memory allocation configuration in FreeRTOS
    version 9. No common code changes.

Reliance Edge v1.0.2, February 2016

Common Code Changes

-   A new per-volume configuration option has been added: users can
    specify a number of times to retry a block device read, write or
    flush operation before returning a failure. The configuration tool
    has been updated to version 1.0.2 with this change.
    -   This added a new field to the volume configuration in redconf.c:
        existing redconf.c files from v1.0.1 and earlier must be updated
        to work with v1.0.2. Open redconf.h and redconf.c with the
        configuration tool, enable "Retry block device I/O on failure"
        for any volumes if desired, and save the redconf files.

FreeRTOS Port Changes

-   Added support for the STM32 HAL SD card driver in the FreeRTOS block
    device interface. Two boards are supported out-of-the-box: the
    STM324xG-EVAL and the STM32F746NG-Discovery. A sample project is
    included for the STM324xG-EVAL.

MQX Port Changes

-   Fixed a bug which prevented Reliance Edge from compiling if the File
    System Essentials API was selected in the configuration.
-   Fixed a bug which would have returned an uninitialized value from
    RedOsBDevFlush() for block devices that support flushing.

Reliance Edge v1.0.1, October 2015

-   Added MQX RTOS support in the commercial kit, with example projects
    for the Kinetis Design Studio.
-   Bug fix in the F_DRIVER implementation of the FreeRTOS block device
    service.

Reliance Edge v1.0, July 2015

Common Code Changes

-   First release of commercial kit and MISRA C:2012 Design Assurance
    Package. The commercial kit includes many new tools and tests which
    were not previously available.
-   Overhauled parsing of command-line parameters to be consistent for
    all tools and tests. Command-line tools now use Unix-style short and
    long options (such as -H and --help) instead of DOS-style switches
    (such as /?).
-   Renamed all os/*/include/ostypes.h headers to
    os/*/include/redostypes.h, so that all headers use the product
    prefix. If you created a port using v0.9, this header needs to be
    renamed and its header guard (#ifndef OSTYPES_H etc.) should also be
    updated.
-   Add a new header for OS-specific MISRA C:2012 deviation macros,
    located at os/*/include/redosdeviations.h. If you created a port
    using v0.9, copy the template from os/stub/include/redosdeviations.h
    into the include directory.
-   Eliminated support for sector sizes less than 256. If using a
    smaller sector size (say for a RAM disk), this must now be emulated
    in the implementation of the block device OS service.
-   Added RedFseFormat() as an optional FSE API, allowing FSE
    applications to format the volume at run-time.
    -   This added a new macro to redconf.h: existing redconf.h files
        from v0.9 must be updated to work with v1.0. Open redconf.h with
        the configuration tool, ignore the warning about the missing
        macro, and save it.
-   Internal restructuring has renamed the macros for the string and
    memory functions used in redconf.h. An existing redconf.h file from
    v0.9 will need to be updated; for a file containing the old names,
    the new config tool will default to using the (slow) Reliance Edge
    string/memory functions; to use the C library or custom versions,
    this will need to be selected in the configuration utility.
-   Fix a bug which would result in an error when attempting to create a
    name with one or more trailing path separators (such as
    red_mkdir("/foo/bar/")).
-   Fix a bug where an open handle for an inode on one volume would
    prevent the same inode number from being deleted on a different
    volume.

FreeRTOS Port Changes

-   The implementation of the timestamp OS service no longer requires
    that configUSE_TIMERS be set to 1.

Reliance Edge v0.9 (Beta), April 2015

First public release.
